Use Case Docs: Headless CMS (#294)
directus/docs: use-cases/headless-cms/headless-cms-concepts.md

---
description: Learn the terms and concepts you need to know about Headless CMS.
tags: []
skill_level:
directus_version:
author_override:
author: Bryant Gillespie
---

# Headless CMS Concepts

> {{ $frontmatter.description }}

> If you’re new to headless CMS, it can be hard to wrap your head around the terminology at first. Here’s some some
> helpful definitions of terms you’ll likely see again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re new to using a Headless CMS, it can be hard to wrap your head around the terminology at first. Here’s some some
helpful definitions of terms you’ll likely see again.
```

### What is a front-end?

**Front-end = presentation layer**

A front-end is the part of a website or web application that the user sees and interacts with. It typically consists of
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, and is responsible for the look and feel of the website.

In the context of a headless CMS, the front-end is the part of the website or application that displays the content from
the CMS.

### What is a back end?

**Back-end = Headless CMS + Database + APIs**

A back-end is the part of a website or web application that stores data and runs the code to make things work. It
typically consists of a database and a set of APIs that make it easy for the front-end to access and display the
content.

In the context of a headless CMS, the back-end is the part of the website or application that stores and manages the
content from the CMS.

### What are APIs?

> APIs, or Application Programming Interfaces, are like the middleman between two systems. For example, in a headless CMS,
> the API is what connects the content stored in the CMS to the front-end of the website or app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APIs, or Application Programming Interfaces, are the glue between two systems. For example, in a Headless CMS,
the API is what connects the content stored in the CMS to the front-end of the website or app.
```

It's like a messenger that takes a request from the front-end (like 'give me the content for this page') and then sends
back the right content from the back-end (like the text, images, and other content stored in the CMS).

It's what makes it possible for the content to be displayed on the page without having to manually manage it.

> 

Reviewer: Add this - I think it's important to talk about fixed endpoints/params

> APIs provide a set of instructions on what data can be accessed and created - with a set of pre-defined options. It acts as a promise that, if you make a specific request, you get a known behavior and response - not dissimilar to a restaurant menu.

### What is data fetching?

Data fetching is a process used to retrieve data from a server or database. In the context of headless CMS and front-end
frameworks , data fetching is used to get the content from the headless CMS and display it on the page.

This process is typically done using an API, which is a set of instructions that tells the server what data to return
and how to format it. Data fetching makes it possible to create dynamic, content-rich websites and applications without
having to manually manage the content.

### What is static site generation (SSG)?

Static site generation (SSG) is a method of building websites and web applications where the content is compiled into
HTML, CSS, and Javascript files at build time. These files are then served directly to the browser, with no server-side
code.

This makes the website or application faster, more secure, and easier to manage. It also allows the content to be stored
and managed in a separate system, like a headless CMS.

> ### What is server side rendering (SSR)?

Reviewer: Swap this and the above - understanding dynamic/traditional web applications is kinda the pre-req to understanding static

In the context of headless CMS, SSR allows for content from the CMS to be dynamically served on the page without having
to manually compile the HTML.

### What are builds / deployments? What does it mean to trigger a build?

Builds and deployments are the processes of taking the content from a headless CMS and combining it with a static site
generator to create a fully functioning website or web application.

The build process compiles all the code and content together and creates the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript needed for the
website or application.

The deployment process then takes the build and deploys it to a hosting provider or other web service.

### What is a deploy preview / preview deployment?

A deploy preview (or preview deployment) is a way to view what your website or web application will look like when you
deploy it.

It's a great way to preview changes before they go live, and makes sure everything looks the way you expect it to.

With a headless CMS, you can create a deploy preview of your website or web application to make sure the content from
your CMS is displaying correctly. This can save you a lot of time and hassle by catching any issues before they become a

> problem.

Reviewer: Remove this one imo - it's very specific to hosting providers and I don't think we touch on it in our guides?
